src/posts/leadership-not-best-intent.md, before:

---
title: Leadership Isn’t For Best Intent
date: 2022-10-18
tags: [leadership, responsibility]
description: Why I don't think " Assume Best Intent" is a useful request for leaders to make
permalink: posts/{{ title | slugify }}/index.html
status: draft
---

#### Components of the Article

1. Framing
2. Why I think Leaders Ask For Best Intent
3. What I’m Not Saying
4. Problems with Leadership “Best Intent”
5. Potential Replacements
6. Why Best Intent is a worthwhile concept Leaders-\>Non-Leaders

### Framing

There’s the saying, especially at tech companies that you should “assume best intent”. The gist goes that in situations that are unclear or where you believe someone else has done something that makes your life more challenging, it’s likely the result of a misinterpretation or misunderstanding between you and them.

During an earlier period of my career, I walked through a conversation with a boss where they argued that I should look at what I considered “unideal” behavior or outcomes on the part of senior leadership through the lens of “assume best intent”. Basically, I should assume that they weren’t trying to take action to make **my life worse** but trying to take action that they thought was optimal.

My boss wasn’t wrong to share this perspective, but I pushed back, and I continue to believe that it’s not a particularly useful ask or expectation when coming from leaders to the people they are leading.

### Why It Happens

Beyond the general problems with “assumption of best intent”, there are specific problems with leaders asking for an assumption of best intent, I want to specifically deal with the situations where leaders are often in new (and very uncertain) scenarios, asking for “assume best intent” from the people they lead.

I’m going to come at this from the perspective that this is a mostly functional organization, and not one where leaders are actively trying to take advantage of the people they’re leading. I think the request for “best intent” comes from a very sincere (and sometimes vulnerable) place. Leaders recognize their flaws and are asking for patience and understanding from the people they are responsible for.

While facially this seems reasonable, it hides a framing that misses the entire relationship of power structures between the two people. Leaders, especially ones who believe in supportive or servant leadership, often fail to see the very real power differences in one on one conversations. These conversations can feel more like chats between peers and not commands (and it’s the type of thing that tech orgs with flat structures like to reinforce). But the power structure remains and it’s important (and worthwhile) as a leader to make that power differential apparent. It puts the conversation between you as a leader, and the person you’re conversing with on the most equal footing.

### What I’m Not Saying

My goal here isn’t to argue that you should assume worst intent, far from it. It’s more to say that when leaders are asking for forgiveness, understanding, or a retry from negative outcomes, they have to recognize that the framing around their process and their results is entirely different than it might be for someone else.

## 1. Your Bad Outcome Might Be Their Good Outcome

The problem with best intent fundamentally comes down to this: even the best case scenario when a leader crafts a plan, communicates, executes, and involves all stakeholders, it can still lead to a surprising amount of challenge for the people they lead. And if that’s the best case scenario that means that worse case scenarios are even more fraught sets of traps and confusion.

When an engineer pushes code that brings down production and ruins my weekend, I understand we’re in the same boat and working towards similar goals, even if I’m frustrated. When a leader assigns me more work that ruins my weekend, or takes away an opportunity, or makes my job less enjoyable, it’s a different sets of concerns and responsibilities.

## 2. Best Intent Doesn’t Preclude Bad Outcomes, and that’s the Standard that Leaders Should Be Held To

If that’s the best case scenario, what happens when things go wrong? Let’s say a leader makes a decision using “best intent” and things work out poorly for their team.

Well, in my opinion best intent short circuits necessary conversations, responsibilities, and ownerships that leaders need to take to either regain or retain trust of the people they lead. When you mess up, what defines your ability to maintain the trust of the people who work with you isn’t whether or not you went in with good intentions. It’s driven by your ability to show thoughtful understanding of what happened, how the people around you felt about it, and what action you plan to take in the future to prevent it from happening again. And then, taking the necessary steps to show that growth as time goes on.

The world where you’re taking those actions, best intent and worst intent are **somewhat** irrelevant. A manager who selfishly follows those best practices because they’re trying to climb the ladder to Senior Leadership is probably going to have a better team culture than a manager who loves each of their team members but stumbles their way into mistakes.

Basically, one of the biggest differences between being a leader and being an individual contributor is how much you are judged on intent versus how much you are judged on outcome. This isn’t to say leader should all be judged harshly on their first mistakes, but when you’re responsible for other people’s livelihoods you are playing with a different set of metrics, that’s the trade off.

## 3. Transparency Starts from Leadership, Not From Those Being Lead

Finally, “best intent” heads off a number of conversations about transparency that are necessary to develop and maintain trust. “Best Intent” comes from a place of necessary opacity. Basically, at some point you and your teammates are working on stuff at such a pace that constant communication is impossible. If you don’t understand **why something happened** you need to make a decision on whether or not to ask, “best intent” changes the number of things that might make you pause and ask for clarification.

But transparency is the beating heart of good leadership. Being the person that “catches all of the shit” doesn’t actually make you a better leader. At best it might lead to your team being in a [values oasis](https://lethain.com/values-oasis/), and at worst it might mean you are withholding vital information from the people who are actually doing the work.

Sometimes, as a leader, you might need to say “just trust me on this”. But in those cases, you should quickly follow up after the results explaining the why and the how of the situation. Those closed loops are what build the lasting relationship between leaders and contributors.

## Escaping Best Intent Scenarios

Firstly, let’s be clear here. If you are in consistent situations where you, as a leader have to choose between following your first team and supporting your immediate team, you are likely in a no win situation and occasionally the correct answer is to leave. And that’s a choice you’ll have to make.

But, let’s assume you’re in a good situation, and just dealing with he general challenges of leadership (of which there are many, even in good situations). In this situation, it’s important to prep, act, and follow-up pretty much in all phases, and to accept that the best way to build trust is to

## Where Best Intent Thrives

- Down status levels
- across status levels

## What To Do Instead of Best Intent

Commit message:

More draft of not best intent

src/posts/leadership-not-best-intent.md, after:

---
title: Leadership Isn’t For Best Intent
date: 2022-10-18
tags: [leadership, responsibility]
description: Why I don't think " Assume Best Intent" is a useful request for leaders to make
permalink: posts/{{ title | slugify }}/index.html
status: draft
---

### Framing

There’s the saying, especially at tech companies that you should “assume best intent”. The gist goes that in situations that are unclear or where you believe someone else has done something that makes your life more challenging, it’s likely the result of a misinterpretation or misunderstanding between you and them.

During an earlier period of my career, I walked through a conversation with a boss where they argued that I should look at what I considered “unideal” behavior or outcomes on the part of senior leadership through the lens of “assume best intent”. Basically, I should assume that they weren’t trying to take action to make **my life worse** but trying to take action that they thought was optimal.

My boss wasn’t wrong to share this perspective, but I pushed back, and I continue to believe that it’s not a particularly useful ask or expectation when coming from leaders to the people they are leading.

### Why It Happens

Beyond the general problems with “assumption of best intent”, there are specific problems with leaders asking for an assumption of best intent, I want to specifically deal with the situations where leaders are often in new (and very uncertain) scenarios, asking for “assume best intent” from the people they lead.

I’m going to come at this from the perspective that this is a mostly functional organization, and not one where leaders are actively trying to take advantage of the people they’re leading. I think the request for “best intent” comes from a very sincere (and sometimes vulnerable) place. Leaders recognize their flaws and are asking for patience and understanding from the people they are responsible for.

While facially this seems reasonable, it hides a framing that misses the entire relationship of power structures between the two people. Leaders, especially ones who believe in supportive or servant leadership, often fail to see the very real power differences in one on one conversations. These conversations can feel more like chats between peers and not commands (and it’s the type of thing that tech orgs with flat structures like to reinforce). But the power structure remains and it’s important (and worthwhile) as a leader to make that power differential apparent. It puts the conversation between you as a leader, and the person you’re conversing with on the most equal footing.

### What I’m Not Saying

My goal here isn’t to argue that you should assume worst intent, far from it. It’s more to say that when leaders are asking for forgiveness, understanding, or a retry from negative outcomes, they have to recognize that the framing around their process and their results is entirely different than it might be for someone else.

### 1. Your Bad Outcome Might Be Their Good Outcome

The problem with best intent fundamentally comes down to this: even the best case scenario when a leader crafts a plan, communicates, executes, and involves all stakeholders, it can still lead to a surprising amount of challenge for the people they lead. And if that’s the best case scenario that means that worse case scenarios are even more fraught sets of traps and confusion.

When an engineer pushes code that brings down production and ruins my weekend, I understand we’re in the same boat and working towards similar goals, even if I’m frustrated. When a leader assigns me more work that ruins my weekend, or takes away an opportunity, or makes my job less enjoyable, it’s a different sets of concerns and responsibilities.

### 2. Best Intent Doesn’t Preclude Bad Outcomes, and that’s the Standard that Leaders Should Be Held To

If that’s the best case scenario, what happens when things go wrong? Let’s say a leader makes a decision using “best intent” and things work out poorly for their team.

Well, in my opinion best intent short circuits necessary conversations, responsibilities, and ownerships that leaders need to take to either regain or retain trust of the people they lead. When you mess up, what defines your ability to maintain the trust of the people who work with you isn’t whether or not you went in with good intentions. It’s driven by your ability to show thoughtful understanding of what happened, how the people around you felt about it, and what action you plan to take in the future to prevent it from happening again. And then, taking the necessary steps to show that growth as time goes on.

The world where you’re taking those actions, best intent and worst intent are **somewhat** irrelevant. A manager who selfishly follows those best practices because they’re trying to climb the ladder to Senior Leadership is probably going to have a better team culture than a manager who loves each of their team members but stumbles their way into mistakes.

Basically, one of the biggest differences between being a leader and being an individual contributor is how much you are judged on intent versus how much you are judged on outcome. This isn’t to say leader should all be judged harshly on their first mistakes, but when you’re responsible for other people’s livelihoods you are playing with a different set of metrics, that’s the trade off.

### 3. Transparency Starts from Leadership, Not From Those Being Lead

Finally, “best intent” heads off a number of conversations about transparency that are necessary to develop and maintain trust. “Best Intent” comes from a place of necessary opacity. Basically, at some point you and your teammates are working on stuff at such a pace that constant communication is impossible. If you don’t understand **why something happened** you need to make a decision on whether or not to ask, “best intent” changes the number of things that might make you pause and ask for clarification.

But transparency is the beating heart of good leadership. Being the person that “catches all of the shit” doesn’t actually make you a better leader. At best it might lead to your team being in a [values oasis](https://lethain.com/values-oasis/), and at worst it might mean you are withholding vital information from the people who are actually doing the work.

Sometimes, as a leader, you might need to say “just trust me on this”. But in those cases, you should quickly follow up after the results explaining the why and the how of the situation. Those closed loops are what build the lasting relationship between leaders and contributors.

### Where Best Intent Thrives

I do think there are a couple of situations where best intent executes the best, even better than across coworkers.

And this is in situations where a leader is evaluating or struggling to understand why a contributor is making decisions that are confusing or you otherwise misunderstand.

In this situation there are basically three outcomes you can assume:

- This person is working with their best intent but lacks the information to take the correct action that you would expect
- This person is working with their best intent but lacks the skills to meet your expectations
- This person is choosing not to take actions because they are lazy or don’t wish to work

“Best Intent” is an incredibly useful tool in this context because the first two situations above are fixable. You can take discrete actions, as a leader, to help improve their information, help them grow through their weaknesses, or some combination of the two. The third situation you are basically forcing yourself into a situation where you’re stuck.

### What To Do Instead of Best Intent

Now, you might say this sort of framing creates a sort of transactional relationship between leaders and contributors, if contributors or only judging leaders on their actions.

My intent here isn’t to create a sort of grading system where contributors only view leadership behavior as to whether or not it is good or bad for them. This is specifically a response to what sorts of expectations leader should make in “mistakes were made” situations. As contributors we all sort of know that not everything is going to go our way. And we can judge our leaders’ impact based on the sum of decisions they’ve made (which transparency helps us do!).

But there are some behaviors when stuff goes wrong, or in situations where you can’t actually give full transparency about the situation. There are some motions I would probably make in this situation to help your contributors understand what’s going on:

- Share with them the limits of your power, knowledge or responsibility
- Share with them the tradeoffs you’re trying to manage, and explain why there are tradeoffs from your perspective
- Share with them your actual emotions, don’t try to hide behind positivity. If things suck right now, that’s ok. But if you believe they won’t suck tomorrow, explain that too.

No one wants to look like an idiot in front of the people they lead. I think this often prevents us from being honest about the limitations of our perspective. But these are situations where we under-appreciate the protections that our status as leaders give us. People will be more predisposed to believe our viewpoints, be less able to to take action against us, and will generally default to the trust we seek, as long as we are sharing information appropriately.
