src/posts/pit-of-success.md, before:

---
title: Your Pit of Success Needs to be close enough to fall into
date: 2022-09-14
tags: ["engineering", "system design", "quick thought"]
description: Some thoughts on how to build pits of success so your developers actually fall in them.
permalink: posts/{{ title | slugify }}/index.html
status: published
---

We've gotten to the point in software engineering where the concept of a [pit of success](https://blog.codinghorror.com/falling-into-the-pit-of-success/) is mostly taken for granted. It's great that framework and system designers are showing the desire (and sometimes wherewithal) to make systems that users fail into success.

Dan Abramov made a great addendum to this in [Optimized for Change](https://overreacted.io/optimized-for-change/). When you design an API it's not good enough for you to make a system that's good now. Your system has to be good through time as well. Well, I'd like to propose a 0th order concern you'd have.

But I think sometimes when we think about pits of success we think about them in the context of shiny new systems and frameworks. I'm going to build this new system/framework/technology and it's going to have **more pits of success than you can imagine**. So many pits you can't help but trip into a bottomless well of infinite success.

But what people tend to forget is that the fact that these are **new** means that they are building their pit on a mountaintop. Yes, it would be great if your users were on that shiny new system where you could gently guide them from decision to decision. But they're not. It's way more likely they're in the [99%](https://future.com/software-development-building-for-99-developers/) on an old version of some framework trying to make their project successful.

Most systemic change doesn't start fresh. It starts in existing systems that have lots of gnarled roots and stuff that can easily trip you up. Most of your users are tired of just trying to make it through the world and not thinking about what mountain they're going to have to climb (system changes, package or version upgrades, coding language changes)

Maybe you've built nothing but a beautiful ball pit full of joy and happiness. But if that pit is on the top of Mt. Everest it's not all that helpful for anyone.

This means sometimes the first steps towards iterative change aren't thinking about how one can push developers in a pit of success, but instead about getting them up the mountain.

Commit message:

Add read time and the pit of success

src/posts/pit-of-success.md, after:

---
title: Your Pit of Success Needs to be close enough to fall into
date: 2022-09-14
tags: ["engineering", "system design", "quick thought"]
description: Some thoughts on how to build pits of success so your developers actually fall in them.
permalink: posts/{{ title | slugify }}/index.html
status: published
socialImage: /images/ian-chen-wrrgZwI7qOY-unsplash.jpg
---

We've gotten to the point in software engineering where the concept of a [pit of success](https://blog.codinghorror.com/falling-into-the-pit-of-success/) is mostly taken for granted. It's great that framework and system designers are showing the desire (and sometimes wherewithal) to make systems that users fail into success.

![image](/images/ian-chen-wrrgZwI7qOY-unsplash.jpg)
_This pit of success can be yours for the low low price of..._

Dan Abramov made a great addendum to this in [Optimized for Change](https://overreacted.io/optimized-for-change/). When you design an API it's not good enough for you to make a system that's good now. Your system has to be good through time as well. Well, I'd like to propose a 0th order concern you'd have.

But I think sometimes when we think about pits of success we think about them in the context of shiny new systems and frameworks. I'm going to build this new system/framework/technology and it's going to have **more pits of success than you can imagine**. So many pits you can't help but trip into a bottomless well of infinite success.

But what people tend to forget is that the fact that these are **new** means that they are building their pit on a mountaintop. Yes, it would be great if your users were on that shiny new system where you could gently guide them from decision to decision. But they're not. It's way more likely they're in the [99%](https://future.com/software-development-building-for-99-developers/) on an old version of some framework trying to make their project successful.

Most systemic change doesn't start fresh. It starts in existing systems that have lots of gnarled roots and stuff that can easily trip you up. Most of your users are tired of just trying to make it through the world and not thinking about what mountain they're going to have to climb (system changes, package or version upgrades, coding language changes)

Maybe you've built nothing but a beautiful ball pit full of joy and happiness. But if that pit is on the top of Mt. Everest it's not all that helpful for anyone.

This means sometimes the first steps towards iterative change aren't thinking about how one can push developers in a pit of success, but instead about getting them up the mountain.
